docs/NETWORK_MONITOR_UPDATE.md, before:

# PeakView - Network Monitor Update

## Major Update: Network Monitoring & Privacy-First Architecture

### Overview
This update introduces a comprehensive network monitoring tool to PeakView, built with **privacy and security as the top priority**. The network monitor provides Wireshark-like functionality while maintaining complete user privacy and data security.

---

## 🆕 New Features

### 1. Network Monitor Tab
A complete network traffic monitoring solution integrated into PeakView's main window.

#### Features:
- **Real-time Connection Tracking**: Monitor all active TCP and UDP connections
- **Process Attribution**: See which app is using each connection
- **Traffic Statistics**: Track bytes sent/received per connection
- **Protocol Support**: TCP, UDP, ICMP monitoring
- **Connection States**: Full visibility into connection lifecycle (ESTABLISHED, LISTEN, etc.)
- **Filtering & Search**:
  - Filter by protocol (TCP/UDP)
  - Filter by connection state (Established/Listening)
  - Search by process name, address, or port
  - Sort by process, protocol, address, state, or traffic
- **Export Functionality**: Export connection data to CSV for analysis

#### UI Components:
- **Connection List**: Wireshark-style table with sortable columns
- **Details Panel**: Deep dive into selected connections with:
  - Process information (name, PID)
  - Connection details (protocol, state, addresses, ports)
  - Traffic statistics (download, upload, total)
  - Timestamps
- **Statistics Bar**: Real-time metrics
  - Active connections count
  - Total traffic
  - Packets per second
- **Control Buttons**:
  - Start/Pause monitoring
  - Clear all data
  - Export to CSV
  - Refresh connections

### 2. Tab-Based Navigation
The main window now features a modern tab system:
- **System Monitor** Tab (Blue-to-Cyan gradient)
- **Tasks** Tab (Green-to-Mint gradient)
- **Network** Tab (Purple-to-Pink gradient)

Benefits:
- Cleaner, more organized interface
- Easy switching between monitoring tools
- Better use of screen real estate
- Consistent navigation pattern

---

## 🔒 Privacy & Security Features

### Privacy-First Design Principles:

1. **Zero Data Collection**:
   - No analytics or telemetry
   - No phone-home functionality
   - All monitoring is 100% local

2. **No External Communication**:
   - Network monitor only observes local connections
   - Does NOT intercept or modify packets
   - Does NOT send data outside your Mac
   - Does NOT store data persistently (except manual exports)

3. **Sandboxed Architecture**:
   - Uses macOS system APIs (`netstat`) for connection info
   - No packet interception or deep packet inspection
   - Read-only access to connection metadata
   - Does NOT require root/admin privileges for basic functionality

4. **Limited Scope**:
   - Only displays connection metadata (addresses, ports, states)
   - Does NOT capture packet contents
   - Does NOT decrypt encrypted traffic
   - Does NOT log sensitive data

5. **User Control**:
   - Start/stop monitoring at any time
   - Clear all data with one click
   - Export only what you explicitly choose
   - Full transparency of what's being monitored

### Technical Security Measures:

#### Safe APIs:
```swift
// Uses system commands, not packet capture
- netstat (for TCP/UDP connections)
- ps (for process names)
- sysctlbyname (for system info)
```

#### No Deep Packet Inspection:
- Does NOT use `libpcap` or `BPF` (packet capture)
- Does NOT intercept network traffic
- Does NOT require promiscuous mode
- Does NOT need network driver access

#### Data Handling:
- All data stored in memory only
- Automatic cleanup when monitoring stops
- No persistent logs or history
- Export is manual and user-controlled

---

## 🛠️ Implementation Details

### New Files:
1. **NetworkMonitor.swift** (~415 lines)
   - `NetworkConnection` model with all connection metadata
   - `PacketInfo` struct for future packet-level stats
   - `NetworkStats` for aggregated statistics
   - `NetworkMonitor` class with real-time monitoring

2. **NetworkManagerView.swift** (~690 lines)
   - Complete Wireshark-like UI
   - Connection list with sorting
   - Details panel
   - Filtering and search
   - Export functionality

### Modified Files:
1. **MainWindowView.swift**
   - Added tab-based navigation
   - Integrated Network Monitor tab
   - Modern TabButton component
   - Removed redundant headers from System Monitor and Task Manager

### Architecture:
```
NetworkMonitor (Data Layer)
    ↓
NetworkManagerView (UI Layer)
    ↓
MainWindowView (Tab Container)
    ↓
PeakViewApp (Window Management)
```

---

## 📊 Network Monitor Capabilities

### What It CAN Do:
✅ Show active network connections
✅ Identify which apps are using network
✅ Display connection states and protocols
✅ Track bytes sent/received per connection
✅ Filter and search connections
✅ Export connection data to CSV
✅ Real-time monitoring with 2-second refresh

### What It CANNOT Do (By Design):
❌ Capture packet contents
❌ Decrypt encrypted traffic
❌ Intercept or modify network data
❌ Store connection history persistently
❌ Send any data outside your Mac
❌ Perform man-in-the-middle attacks
❌ Bypass VPNs or encrypted connections

---

## 🎨 UI/UX Improvements

### Color Scheme:
- **System Monitor**: Blue-to-cyan gradients
- **Task Manager**: Green-to-mint gradients
- **Network Monitor**: Purple-to-pink gradients

### Visual Indicators:
- **Protocol Colors**:
  - TCP: Blue
  - UDP: Green
  - ICMP: Orange

- **Connection State Colors**:
  - ESTABLISHED: Green
  - LISTEN: Blue
  - CLOSING states: Orange
  - Others: Gray

- **Monitoring Status**:
  - Green pulse when active
  - Stats update in real-time

### Accessibility:
- High-contrast text
- Clear visual hierarchy
- Tooltips on all buttons
- Keyboard navigation ready (for future enhancement)

---

## 🔮 Future Enhancements

### Planned (Not Yet Implemented):
1. **Bandwidth Alerts**: Notify when specific apps exceed limits
2. **Historical Charts**: Graph network usage over time
3. **Geo-IP Lookup**: Show location of remote addresses (optional, privacy-conscious)
4. **Blocklist**: Temporarily block specific connections
5. **Firewall Integration**: Quick rules from connection list

### Security Enhancements:
1. **Entitlements Configuration**: Minimal required permissions
2. **Code Signing**: Enhanced security verification
3. **Notarization**: macOS Gatekeeper compliance

---

## 📝 Usage Guide

### Getting Started:
1. Launch PeakView
2. Click the **Network** tab in the main window
3. Click **Start** to begin monitoring
4. Watch real-time connections appear in the table

### Filtering Connections:
- Click filter chips: All, TCP, UDP, Established, Listening
- Use the search bar to find specific processes or addresses
- Click column headers to sort

### Viewing Details:
- Click any connection in the list
- View full details in the right panel
- See process info, connection details, and traffic stats

### Exporting Data:
- Click the **Export** button (↑ icon)
- Choose a location to save the CSV file
- Open in Numbers, Excel, or any spreadsheet app

### Privacy Control:
- Click **Pause** to stop monitoring
- Click **Clear** (trash icon) to delete all data
- Close the window or quit the app to stop completely

---

## ⚙️ Technical Specifications

### System Requirements:
- macOS 13.0+ (Ventura or later)
- No special permissions required for basic monitoring
- Optional: Admin access for enhanced process info

### Performance:
- Update interval: 2 seconds (configurable)
- Memory efficient: ~10-20MB for typical usage
- CPU impact: <1% when idle, <5% when actively monitoring
- No background activity when not monitoring

### Data Privacy:
- **No persistent storage**: All data is in-memory only
- **No network communication**: 100% local
- **No logging**: No hidden logs or caches
- **User-controlled exports**: Manual only

### Compatibility:
- Works with all network protocols
- Compatible with VPNs
- Works with corporate networks
- No interference with security software

---

## 🚀 Build Status

- **Compilation**: ✅ Successful
- **Warnings**: Minor (unused variables in unrelated files)
- **Installation**: ✅ Successful
- **Code Signing**: ✅ Verified
- **Ready for Use**: ✅ Yes

---

## 📋 Checklist for Release

### Completed:
- [x] Network Monitor core functionality
- [x] UI implementation with Wireshark-like design
- [x] Tab-based navigation system
- [x] Filtering and search
- [x] Export to CSV
- [x] Real-time statistics
- [x] Privacy-first architecture
- [x] Zero data collection
- [x] Local-only operation

### Pending:
- [ ] Entitlements configuration for network access
- [ ] Enhanced error handling
- [ ] Keyboard shortcuts (Cmd+R refresh, etc.)
- [ ] Resource alerts system
- [ ] User documentation
- [ ] App notarization for distribution

---

## 🎯 Privacy Commitment

**PeakView's Network Monitor is designed to be UNHACKABLE in the sense that:**

1. **No Attack Surface**: We don't collect data, so there's nothing to hack
2. **No Backend**: 100% local operation means no server vulnerabilities
3. **No Persistent Data**: Data exists only in memory during use
4. **Minimal Permissions**: Uses only standard macOS APIs
5. **Open Design**: Architecture is transparent and auditable

**Your network data never leaves your Mac. Period.**

---

## 📞 Support & Feedback

This is a major feature addition. Testing and feedback appreciated!

**Privacy Questions?**
- All network monitoring is read-only
- No packet contents are captured
- No data sent to external servers
- You have complete control over when monitoring runs

---

*Last Updated: 2025-11-03*
*Version: 1.1.0 (Network Monitor Update)*

Commit message:

Rebrand from PeakView to Atlas
- Rename PeakViewApp.swift → AtlasApp.swift
- Rename PeakViewLoadingView.swift → AtlasLoadingView.swift
- Rename PeakView.entitlements → Atlas.entitlements
- Update Info.plist bundle identifier to com.ahmedzitoun.atlas
- Update Package.swift executable name to Atlas
- Update build_app.sh, install.sh, create_dmg.sh for Atlas
- Update all documentation (8 files) with new branding
- Remove legacy desktopie.sln Windows solution file
- Update website index.html

docs/NETWORK_MONITOR_UPDATE.md, after:

# Atlas - Network Monitor Update

## Major Update: Network Monitoring & Privacy-First Architecture

### Overview
This update introduces a comprehensive network monitoring tool to Atlas, built with **privacy and security as the top priority**. The network monitor provides Wireshark-like functionality while maintaining complete user privacy and data security.

---

## 🆕 New Features

### 1. Network Monitor Tab
A complete network traffic monitoring solution integrated into Atlas's main window.

#### Features:
- **Real-time Connection Tracking**: Monitor all active TCP and UDP connections
- **Process Attribution**: See which app is using each connection
- **Traffic Statistics**: Track bytes sent/received per connection
- **Protocol Support**: TCP, UDP, ICMP monitoring
- **Connection States**: Full visibility into connection lifecycle (ESTABLISHED, LISTEN, etc.)
- **Filtering & Search**:
  - Filter by protocol (TCP/UDP)
  - Filter by connection state (Established/Listening)
  - Search by process name, address, or port
  - Sort by process, protocol, address, state, or traffic
- **Export Functionality**: Export connection data to CSV for analysis

#### UI Components:
- **Connection List**: Wireshark-style table with sortable columns
- **Details Panel**: Deep dive into selected connections with:
  - Process information (name, PID)
  - Connection details (protocol, state, addresses, ports)
  - Traffic statistics (download, upload, total)
  - Timestamps
- **Statistics Bar**: Real-time metrics
  - Active connections count
  - Total traffic
  - Packets per second
- **Control Buttons**:
  - Start/Pause monitoring
  - Clear all data
  - Export to CSV
  - Refresh connections

### 2. Tab-Based Navigation
The main window now features a modern tab system:
- **System Monitor** Tab (Blue-to-Cyan gradient)
- **Tasks** Tab (Green-to-Mint gradient)
- **Network** Tab (Purple-to-Pink gradient)

Benefits:
- Cleaner, more organized interface
- Easy switching between monitoring tools
- Better use of screen real estate
- Consistent navigation pattern

---

## 🔒 Privacy & Security Features

### Privacy-First Design Principles:

1. **Zero Data Collection**:
   - No analytics or telemetry
   - No phone-home functionality
   - All monitoring is 100% local

2. **No External Communication**:
   - Network monitor only observes local connections
   - Does NOT intercept or modify packets
   - Does NOT send data outside your Mac
   - Does NOT store data persistently (except manual exports)

3. **Sandboxed Architecture**:
   - Uses macOS system APIs (`netstat`) for connection info
   - No packet interception or deep packet inspection
   - Read-only access to connection metadata
   - Does NOT require root/admin privileges for basic functionality

4. **Limited Scope**:
   - Only displays connection metadata (addresses, ports, states)
   - Does NOT capture packet contents
   - Does NOT decrypt encrypted traffic
   - Does NOT log sensitive data

5. **User Control**:
   - Start/stop monitoring at any time
   - Clear all data with one click
   - Export only what you explicitly choose
   - Full transparency of what's being monitored

### Technical Security Measures:

#### Safe APIs:
```swift
// Uses system commands, not packet capture
- netstat (for TCP/UDP connections)
- ps (for process names)
- sysctlbyname (for system info)
```

#### No Deep Packet Inspection:
- Does NOT use `libpcap` or `BPF` (packet capture)
- Does NOT intercept network traffic
- Does NOT require promiscuous mode
- Does NOT need network driver access

#### Data Handling:
- All data stored in memory only
- Automatic cleanup when monitoring stops
- No persistent logs or history
- Export is manual and user-controlled

---

## 🛠️ Implementation Details

### New Files:
1. **NetworkMonitor.swift** (~415 lines)
   - `NetworkConnection` model with all connection metadata
   - `PacketInfo` struct for future packet-level stats
   - `NetworkStats` for aggregated statistics
   - `NetworkMonitor` class with real-time monitoring

2. **NetworkManagerView.swift** (~690 lines)
   - Complete Wireshark-like UI
   - Connection list with sorting
   - Details panel
   - Filtering and search
   - Export functionality

### Modified Files:
1. **MainWindowView.swift**
   - Added tab-based navigation
   - Integrated Network Monitor tab
   - Modern TabButton component
   - Removed redundant headers from System Monitor and Task Manager

### Architecture:
```
NetworkMonitor (Data Layer)
    ↓
NetworkManagerView (UI Layer)
    ↓
MainWindowView (Tab Container)
    ↓
AtlasApp (Window Management)
```

---

## 📊 Network Monitor Capabilities

### What It CAN Do:
✅ Show active network connections
✅ Identify which apps are using network
✅ Display connection states and protocols
✅ Track bytes sent/received per connection
✅ Filter and search connections
✅ Export connection data to CSV
✅ Real-time monitoring with 2-second refresh

### What It CANNOT Do (By Design):
❌ Capture packet contents
❌ Decrypt encrypted traffic
❌ Intercept or modify network data
❌ Store connection history persistently
❌ Send any data outside your Mac
❌ Perform man-in-the-middle attacks
❌ Bypass VPNs or encrypted connections

---

## 🎨 UI/UX Improvements

### Color Scheme:
- **System Monitor**: Blue-to-cyan gradients
- **Task Manager**: Green-to-mint gradients
- **Network Monitor**: Purple-to-pink gradients

### Visual Indicators:
- **Protocol Colors**:
  - TCP: Blue
  - UDP: Green
  - ICMP: Orange

- **Connection State Colors**:
  - ESTABLISHED: Green
  - LISTEN: Blue
  - CLOSING states: Orange
  - Others: Gray

- **Monitoring Status**:
  - Green pulse when active
  - Stats update in real-time

### Accessibility:
- High-contrast text
- Clear visual hierarchy
- Tooltips on all buttons
- Keyboard navigation ready (for future enhancement)

---

## 🔮 Future Enhancements

### Planned (Not Yet Implemented):
1. **Bandwidth Alerts**: Notify when specific apps exceed limits
2. **Historical Charts**: Graph network usage over time
3. **Geo-IP Lookup**: Show location of remote addresses (optional, privacy-conscious)
4. **Blocklist**: Temporarily block specific connections
5. **Firewall Integration**: Quick rules from connection list

### Security Enhancements:
1. **Entitlements Configuration**: Minimal required permissions
2. **Code Signing**: Enhanced security verification
3. **Notarization**: macOS Gatekeeper compliance

---

## 📝 Usage Guide

### Getting Started:
1. Launch Atlas
2. Click the **Network** tab in the main window
3. Click **Start** to begin monitoring
4. Watch real-time connections appear in the table

### Filtering Connections:
- Click filter chips: All, TCP, UDP, Established, Listening
- Use the search bar to find specific processes or addresses
- Click column headers to sort

### Viewing Details:
- Click any connection in the list
- View full details in the right panel
- See process info, connection details, and traffic stats

### Exporting Data:
- Click the **Export** button (↑ icon)
- Choose a location to save the CSV file
- Open in Numbers, Excel, or any spreadsheet app

### Privacy Control:
- Click **Pause** to stop monitoring
- Click **Clear** (trash icon) to delete all data
- Close the window or quit the app to stop completely

---

## ⚙️ Technical Specifications

### System Requirements:
- macOS 13.0+ (Ventura or later)
- No special permissions required for basic monitoring
- Optional: Admin access for enhanced process info

### Performance:
- Update interval: 2 seconds (configurable)
- Memory efficient: ~10-20MB for typical usage
- CPU impact: <1% when idle, <5% when actively monitoring
- No background activity when not monitoring

### Data Privacy:
- **No persistent storage**: All data is in-memory only
- **No network communication**: 100% local
- **No logging**: No hidden logs or caches
- **User-controlled exports**: Manual only

### Compatibility:
- Works with all network protocols
- Compatible with VPNs
- Works with corporate networks
- No interference with security software

---

## 🚀 Build Status

- **Compilation**: ✅ Successful
- **Warnings**: Minor (unused variables in unrelated files)
- **Installation**: ✅ Successful
- **Code Signing**: ✅ Verified
- **Ready for Use**: ✅ Yes

---

## 📋 Checklist for Release

### Completed:
- [x] Network Monitor core functionality
- [x] UI implementation with Wireshark-like design
- [x] Tab-based navigation system
- [x] Filtering and search
- [x] Export to CSV
- [x] Real-time statistics
- [x] Privacy-first architecture
- [x] Zero data collection
- [x] Local-only operation

### Pending:
- [ ] Entitlements configuration for network access
- [ ] Enhanced error handling
- [ ] Keyboard shortcuts (Cmd+R refresh, etc.)
- [ ] Resource alerts system
- [ ] User documentation
- [ ] App notarization for distribution

---

## 🎯 Privacy Commitment

**Atlas's Network Monitor is designed to be UNHACKABLE in the sense that:**

1. **No Attack Surface**: We don't collect data, so there's nothing to hack
2. **No Backend**: 100% local operation means no server vulnerabilities
3. **No Persistent Data**: Data exists only in memory during use
4. **Minimal Permissions**: Uses only standard macOS APIs
5. **Open Design**: Architecture is transparent and auditable

**Your network data never leaves your Mac. Period.**

---

## 📞 Support & Feedback

This is a major feature addition. Testing and feedback appreciated!

**Privacy Questions?**
- All network monitoring is read-only
- No packet contents are captured
- No data sent to external servers
- You have complete control over when monitoring runs

---

*Last Updated: 2025-11-03*
*Version: 1.1.0 (Network Monitor Update)*
